Lab IV: Linear Models


1. What makes a model "linear"? "Linear" in what?

A model is linear if the parameters (which are the numbers the model learns so predictions can best fit the data) 
are linear. This means that each coefficient besides the intercept is multiplied by some input variable x (there 
can be multiple features that the model uses, meaning more coefficients with an associated x), and that the coefficients 
are simply of power 1 and stand alone. For example, the model that creates the equation $y = beta_0 + beta_1 * x$ is a 
linear model because the betas are linear. However, the equation $y = beta_0 + beta_1^2 * x$ is not linear because the 
beta_1 coefficient is squared. Overall, a linear model is a weighted sum of feature variables such that the weights/coefficients 
are incorporated linearly in the model.



2. How do you interpret the coefficient for a dummy/one-hot-encoded variable? (This is a trick question, and the trick involves 
how you handle the intercept of the model.) There's further explanation at the end of this document, if needed.

The coefficient for a one-hot-encoded variable depends on the intercept after using drop_first = True when encoding the categorical 
variables (in pd.get_dummies()). We need to drop the first column after encoding a category to avoid the dummy variable trap, since if 
all category values were present, then there would be multicollinearity, meaning that you could obtain all information in one column by 
understanding the others. After dropping the first column from encoding and then creating the model, the resulting intercept represents 
the coefficient from that dropped categorical value. The other coefficients use the intercept as a baseline to assess how the other features 
values impact the model. For example, say there was the category variable of satisfaction rating and the values were "bad," "ok," and "good."
After encoding and dropping, we are left with "ok" and "good." When we create the linear model, the intercept represents the expected value 
of some target variable y when the satisfaction rating is "bad." The first coefficient is then how much the impact of "ok" differs from "bad" 
and the second coefficient is how much the impact of "good" differs from "bad" (not the absolute impact of "ok" or "good" on their own). To see 
the absolute impact, you compare the coefficient values to the intercept, like if the intercept has a value of 100 and beta_1 = 50, that means the 
impact of "ok" would be 100 + 50 = 150. All in all, the coefficient of a dummy variable is its difference from the baseline, represented in the intercept.



3. Can linear regression be used for classification? Explain why, or why not.

Yes, linear regression can be used for classification. This can be done by setting a threshold on a continuous output range, and using it to define 
whether the output is assigned to a positive class or not. For example, say we wanted to predict whether a baseball team wins a football game based 
on payroll. After creating the model, we'll end up with an equation in the form y = mx + b, and we can add a threshold such that if y is above 0.5,
the model predicts a win, but if y is below 0.5, then the model predicts a loss. Then we can make predictions by plugging in data (x values). However,
it's difficult to create a valid classification model because linear regression models can still predict values below 0 or above 1, which doesn't align 
with the probability used for the classification threshold.


4. If you have a high accuracy on testing but low on testing, what might be the problem? It also might be you see a pattern in the residuals. 

In this scenario, the model is experiencing overfitting on the data. This is when the model fits the training data really well but fails to generalize 
well to new data, giving it a low accuracy for this testing data. Overfitting can happen when the model is too complex, such as having too many features
being used, which causes the model to be extra sensitive to training noise rather than learning the true underlying pattern. The residual pattern can be 
an indicator of an overfit model because it means the model is missing the structure in the data. For example, if the residuals - the difference between 
actual and predicted values - show a curved pattern like a parabola, then that means the relationship in the data is nonlinear but we used a linear model 
to try to predict it. 



5. Review this page: [Non-Linear with Linear](https://inria.github.io/scikit-learn-mooc/python_scripts/linear_regression_non_linear_link.html) What are 
two ways to incorporate nonlinear relationships between your target/response/dependent/outcome variable $y$ and your features/control/response/independent 
variables $x$?

One way to incorporate nonlinear relationships between dependent and independent variable is through a decision tree regression. This type of model is inherently
nonlinear. It splits the input space (x) into regions and then predicts a constant value in each region. In a visualization of the data, this would look like
a stepladder through the data points, allowing the model to adapt to nonlinear data. The model basically acts as a piecewise function; for example, the tree 
could decide that x values below 3 correspond to a y value of 100, values between 3 and 5 predict 150, and x values above 5 the model predicts 200. 

A second way to include a nonlinear relationship between target and feature variables is to engineer a different set of features through polynomial regression.
For example, this could mean constructing a model such that $y = beta_0 + beta_1 * x + beta_2 * x^2$. Adding nonlinear features like $x^2$ still keeps the model linear 
in the parameters (betas) but is able to fit nonlinear data by curving the regression line on a plot. Polynomial regression reshapes the features themselves so that it can 
best match the underlying relationship in the data. However, we want to make sure the degree of the polynomial isn't too high since that can lead to overfitting.




6. What is the interpretation of the intercept? A slope coefficient for a variable? The coefficient for a dummy/one-hot-encoded variable?


The intercept in a linear regression model is the predicted value of y when all the features (independent variables) are 0. It's a baseline 
reference point, but when they are dummy variables, it's the expected value of y for the baseline category that was dropped from encoding.

The slope coefficient for a variable describes the change in y for a 1 unit increase in x, holding all other variables constant. For example, 
if the target variable is salary and the feature variable is years of education, and the coefficient for years of education is 10 (thousand), 
that means an additional year of education leads to an increase in salary of $10,000, on average. 

The coefficient for a one-hot-encoded variable is the difference in the expected y from that category compared to the baseline category 
(the intercept), holding all variables constant. It's different than the coefficient for a regular variable because for a dummy variable, 
the coefficient isn't the absolute impact on y but rather its relation to the baseline category.

